'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_errors
.TH \*(n) 5 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_errors \- UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_errors(5)" "UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
The UCSD Adaptive Assembler uses a binary error file.
This simplifies the error processing, at the cost of
.TP 2n
\[bu]
error texts of limited length,
.TP 2n
\[bu]
significant difficulty of editing, and
.TP 2n
\[bu]
when measured in whole 512\[hy]byte blocks, little or no space savings.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
Inconsistent with the textual error file format used by the compiler.
.PP
By using a text file as the primary source, it can be edited easily, and
placed under version control.  The binary file can be created from the
text file using the \f[I]ucsdpsys_errors\fP(1) command.
.SS Format of the Text file
The text file is the same as for the compiler.
.PP
Comments have a hash (\[lq]\f[CW]#\fP\[rq]) in the first column,
and extend to the end of the line.  Blank lines are ignored.
.PP
Each error message has a number, a colon (\[lq]\f[CW]:\fP\[rq]), and the
text of the error message.  Excess white space is discarded.
The lines do not need to be in order, but there may be no duplicates.
Error text lengths in excess of 40 characters are an error.
.SS Format of the Binary file
The error file declared as
.PP
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
type error_string: string[40];
var error_file: file of error_string;
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
That is, each error occupies 42 bytes of the file,
even if the error text is significantly shorter.
There is no way to cram a longer error message into the file.
.PP
The file is indexed by error number, using
.PP
.RS
.ft CW
seek(error_file, error_num);
.ft R
.RE
.PP
Error numbers that are not used contain a value of one space.
Error zero exists in the file, and is unused.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_errors\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file builder
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
