'\" t
.\" UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\" Copyright (C) 2006, 2007, 2010, 2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH Build ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.so etc/version.so
.if n .hy 0
.if n .ad l
.if n .nr IN 8n
.SH NAME
How to build ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc
.XX "" "How to build ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc"
.br
.ne 1i
.SH BEFORE YOU START
There are a few pieces of software you may want to fetch and install
before you proceed with your installation of ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc.
.TP 8n
Boost Library
You will need the C++ Boost Library.  If you are using a
package based system, you will need the \f[I]libboost\[hy]devel\fP
package, or one named something very similar.
.br
http://boost.org/
.TP 8n
libexplain
The \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package depends on the libexplain
package: a library of system\[hy]call\[hy]specific strerror replacements.
.br
http://libexplain.sourceforge.net/
.TP 8n
GNU Groff
The documentation for the
.I ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc
package was prepared using the GNU Groff package (version 1.14 or later).
This distribution includes full documentation,
which may be processed into PostScript or DVI files
at install time \- if GNU Groff has been installed.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH SITE CONFIGURATION
The \f[B]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package is configured using the
\f[I]configure\fP program included in this distribution.
.PP
The \f[I]configure\fP shell script attempts to guess correct values for
various system\[hy]dependent variables used during compilation, and creates
the \f[I]Makefile\fP and \f[I]lib/config.h\fP files.  It also creates a
shell script \f[I]config.status\fP that you can run in the future to
recreate the current configuration.
.PP
Normally, you just \f[I]cd\fP to the directory containing
\f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP's source code and then type
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fP./configure
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
Running \f[I]configure\fP takes a minute or two.  While it is running,
it prints some messages that tell what it is doing.  If you don't want
to see the messages, run \f[I]configure\fP using the quiet option; for
example,
.RS
.FT CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fP./configure \-\-quiet
\bB%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
To compile the \f[B]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package in a different directory
from the one containing the source code, you must use a version of
\f[I]make\fP that supports the \f[I]VPATH\fP variable, such as \f[I]GNU
make\fP.  Change directory to the directory where you want the object
files and executables to go and run the \f[I]configure\fP script.  The
\f[I]configure\fP script automatically checks for the source code in the
directory that \f[I]configure\fP is in and in \f[I]\&..\fP (the parent
directory).  If for some reason \f[I]configure\fP is not in the source
code directory that you are configuring, then it will report that it
can't find the source code.  In that case, run \f[I]configure\fP with the
option \f(CW\-\-srcdir=\fP\f[I]DIR\fP, where \f[I]DIR\fP is the directory that
contains the source code.
.PP
By default, \f[I]configure\fP will arrange for the \f[I]make install\fP
command to install the \f[B]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package's files in
\f[I]/usr/local/bin\fP, and \f[I]/usr/local/man\fP.  There are options which
allow you to control the placement of these files.
.TP 8n
\f[CW]\-\-prefix=\fP\f[I]PATH\fP
This specifies the path prefix to be used in the installation.
Defaults to \f[I]/usr/local\fP unless otherwise specified.
.TP 8n
\f[CW]\-\-exec\-prefix=\fP\f[I]PATH\fP
You can specify separate installation prefixes for
architecture\[hy]specific files files.
Defaults to \f[I]${prefix}\fP unless otherwise specified.
.TP 8n
\f[CW]\-\-bindir=\fP\f[I]PATH\fP
This directory contains executable programs.  On a network, this
directory may be shared between machines with identical hardware and
operating systems; it may be mounted read\[hy]only.  Defaults to
\f[I]${exec_prefix}/bin\fP unless otherwise specified.
.TP 8n
\f[CW]\-\-mandir=\fP\f[I]PATH\fP
This directory contains the on\[hy]line manual entries.  On a network, this
directory may be shared between all machines; it may be mounted
read\[hy]only.  Defaults to \f[I]${prefix}/man\fP unless otherwise specified.
.PP
The \f[I]configure\fP script ignores most other arguments that you give
it; use the \f[CW]\-\-help\fP option for a complete list.
.br
.ne 2i
.PP
On systems that require unusual options for compilation or linking that
the \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package's \f[I]configure\fP script does not
know about, you can give \f[I]configure\fP initial values for variables by
setting them in the environment.  In Bourne\[hy]compatible shells, you can
do that on the command line like this:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]$ \fPCXX='g++ \-traditional' LIBS=\-lposix ./configure
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]$\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
Here are the \f[I]make\fP variables that you might want to override with
environment variables when running \f[I]configure\fP.
.TP 8n
Variable: CXX
C++ compiler program.
The default is
\f[I]c++\fP.
.TP 8n
Variable: CPPFLAGS
Preprocessor flags, commonly defines and include search paths.
Defaults to empty.
It is common to use \f[CW]CPPFLAGS=\-I/usr/local/include\fP to access other
installed packages.
.TP 8n
Variable: INSTALL
Program to use to install files.  The default is \f[I]install\fP if you
have it, \f[I]cp\fP otherwise.
.TP 8n
Variable: LIBS
Libraries to link with, in the form \f(CW\-l\fP\f[I]foo\fP
\f(CW\-l\fP\f[I]bar\fP.  The \f[I]configure\fP script will
append to this, rather than replace it.  It is common to use
\f[CW]LIBS=\-L/usr/local/lib\fP to access other installed packages.
.PP
If you need to do unusual things to compile the package, the author
encourages you to figure out how \f[I]configure\fP could check whether to
do them, and mail diffs or instructions to the author so that they can
be included in the next release.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH BUILDING UCSD\[hy]PSYSTEM\[hy]XC
All you should need to do is use the
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPmake
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
command and wait.  When this finishes you should see a directory called
\f[I]bin\fP containing several programs.
.br
.ne 1.5i
.PP
If you have GNU Groff installed, the build will also create a
\f[I]etc/reference.ps\fP file.  This contains the README file, this
BUILDING file, and all of the man pages.
.PP
You can remove the program binaries and object files from the
source directory by using the
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPmake clean
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
command.  To remove all of the above files, and also remove the
\f[I]Makefile\fP and \f[I]lib/config.h\fP and \f[I]config.status\fP files, use
the
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPmake distclean
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
command.
.PP
The file \f[I]etc/configure.in\fP is used to create \f[I]configure\fP
by a GNU program called \f[I]autoconf\fP.  You only need to know this
if you want to regenerate \f[I]configure\fP using a newer version of
\f[I]autoconf\fP.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH TESTING UCSD\[hy]PSYSTEM\[hy]XC
The \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package comes with a test suite.  To
run this test suite, use the command
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPmake sure
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
.if n \f[B]Passed All Tests\fP
.if t \f(CBPassed All Tests\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
The tests take a few seconds each, with a few very fast, and a couple
very slow, but it varies greatly depending on your CPU.
.PP
If all went well, the message
.RS
.ft CW
Passed All Tests
.ft R
.RE
should appear at the end of the make.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH INSTALLING UCSD\[hy]PSYSTEM\[hy]XC
As explained in the \f[I]SITE CONFIGURATION\fP section, above, the
\f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package is installed under the
\f[I]/usr/local\fP
tree by default.  Use the \f(CW\-\-prefix=\fP\f[I]PATH\fP option
to \f[I]configure\fP if you want some other path.  More specific
installation locations are assignable, use the \f(CW\-\-help\fP option to
\f[I]configure\fP for details.
.PP
All that is required to install the \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP
package is to use the
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPmake install
\f[I]\&...lots of output...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
command.  Control of the directories used may be found in the first
few lines of the \f[I]Makefile\fP file and the other files written
by the \f[I]configure\fP script; it is best to reconfigure using the
\f[I]configure\fP script, rather than attempting to do this by hand.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH GETTING HELP
If you need assistance with the \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package, please
do not hesitate to contact the author at
.RS
.ft CW
Peter Miller <pmiller@opensource.org.au>
.ft R
.RE
Any and all feedback is welcome.
.PP
When reporting problems, please include the version number given by the
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
\f[B]% \fPucsdpsys_compile \-V
.if n \f[B]ucsdpsys_compile version\fP \f[I]\*(V)\fP
.if t \f(CBucsdpsys_compile version\fP \f[I]\*(V)\fP
\f[I]\&...warranty disclaimer...\fP
\f[B]%\fP
.fi
.ft R
.RE
command.  Please do not send this example; run the program for the exact
version number.
.br
.ne 2i
.SH COPYRIGHT
.I ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc
version \*(v)
.br
Copyright
.if n (C)
.if t \(co
\*(Y) Peter Miller
.PP
The \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc\fP package is distributed in the hope
that it will
be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty
of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
.PP
It should be in the \f[I]LICENSE\fP file included with this distribution.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH AUTHOR
.TS
tab(;);
l r l.
Peter Miller;E\[hy]Mail:;pmiller@opensource.org.au
\f(CW/\e/\e*\fP;WWW:;http://miller.emu.id.au/pmiller/
.TE
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
