'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_link
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_link \- UCSD p\[hy]System codefile linker
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_link(1)" "UCSD p\[hy]System codefile linker"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
[
.IR option \&...
]
.IR filename \&...
.sp 0.3
.B \*(n)
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to link incomplete programs with the
library units and external procedures and functions that complete them.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-debug\fP
.br
This option may be used to increase the debug output.
The more time given, the more voluminous the output.
.\" ----------  M  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-m\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-map=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
This option may be used to request that a link map be written to the given file.
.\" ----------  N  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-n\fP \f[I]text\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-notice=\fP\f[I]text\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-copyright=\fP\f[I]text\fP
.br
This option may be used to set the copyright notice of the output codefile.
.\" ----------  O  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-output=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
The option is used to specify the output file.
Not optional.
.\" ----------  P  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_pmachine.so
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-v\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-verbose\fP
This option may be used to request progress information during the link.
This was useful in 1.0MHz days, not so useful now.
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.\" ----------  W  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_assemble\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System cross assembler, for multiple CPU types
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1)
A cross compiler from Pascal to UCSD p\[hy]System codefiles.
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_disassemble\fP(1)
A utility to disassemble UCSD p\[hy]System codefiles.
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_librarian\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System codefile librarian
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
