'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_downcase
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_downcase \- convert Pascal to lower case
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_downcase(1)" "convert Pascal to lower case"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
.IR filename \&...
.sp 0.3
.B \*(n)
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to convert Pascal source code from
upper case to lower case.  It leaves the contents of string constants,
character constants and comments unaltered, but converts all program
text to lower case.
.PP
Pascal is case\[hy]\f[B]in\fPsensitive for all identifiers, so this is a
safe thing to do.  It will not change program semantics.
.PP
Each file named on the command line will be converted in place.  If
no files are named, the standard input is converted and written to the
standard output.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.TP 8n
.B \-V
.TQ 8n
.B \-\-version
.br
Print the version of the
.I \*(n)
program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
