'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_littoral
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd-psystem-xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_littoral \- read UCSD Pascal and write C++
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_littoral(1)" "read UCSD Pascal and write C++"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
[
.IR option \&...
]
.IR filename \&...
.sp 0.3
.B \*(n)
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to read a UCSD pascal program and
write something that is nearly, almost, but not quite, C++.
This can very helpful when trying to replicate the
functionality of a UCSD Pascal program in a more modern environment.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-output=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
This option may be used to select where the output is written.
It defaults to the name of the source \f[CW].text\fP file,
with the extension removed and \[lq]\f[CW].cc\fP\[rq] appended.
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
.br
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
