'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_opcodes
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_opcodes \- UCSD p\[hy]System system.opcodes generator
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_opcodes(1)" "UCSD p\[hy]System system.opcodes generator"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
.B \-e
.I text\[hy]file
.I binary\[hy]file
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-d
.I binary\[hy]file
.I text\[hy]file
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-V
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to
read a text template of an assembler's opcode file
and write the equivalent binary file.
This is used by the \f[I]ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]os\fP project, when building the
assembler and disassembler programs.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  A  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_architecture.so
This option is used to indicate the translation to be performed,
and also the byte sex of the binary files.
The architecture name can usually be found in the name of the binary
\f[I]name\fP\f[CW].OPCODES\fP binary files.
If a p\[hy]code mtype is given, it indicates that the data file is to be
used by the p\[hy]code disassembler, the \f[CW]OPCODES.II.0\fP file.
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-decode\fP
Decode a binary file into a text file.
This can be used to reverse\[hy]engineer the text file from the existing
binary files.  With the passing of time, the method originally used to
create the binary files
has been lost.
.\" ----------  E  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-e\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-encode\fP
Encode a text file into a binary file.
This is used to have an editable text representation of the file contents,
so that they can easily be edited, and version controlled.
.\" ----------  H  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_host.so
This option is used to indicate the translation to be performed,
and also the byte sex of the binary files.
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.\" ----------  Z  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_assemble\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System cross assembler, for multiple CPU types
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_opcodes\fP(5)
format of the OPCODES.II.0 file
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
