'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_errors
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_errors \- UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file builder
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_errors(1)" "UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file builder"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP\&... ][ \f[I]infile\fP [ \f[I]outfile\fP ]]
]]
.br
\fB\*(n) \-\-version\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to translate an assembler error file
from its text for to its binary form, and back again.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  A  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_architecture.so
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-decode\fP
This option is used to specify a translation from binary to text form is
required.  This can be useful for reverse engineering the text when all
you have is the binary form.
.\" ----------  E  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-e\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-encode\fP
This option is used to specify a translation from text to binary is
required.  The binary form is used to simplify the error reporting code.
.\" ----------  H  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_host.so
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.\" ----------  Z  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_errors\fP(5)
UCSD p\[hy]System assembler error file format
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
