'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_setup
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_setup \- manipulate the SYSTEM.MISCINFO file
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_setup(1)" "manipulate the SYSTEM.MISCINFO file"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n) \-e\fP \f[I]textfile\fP \f[I]datafile\fP
.sp 0.3
\fB\*(n) \-d \fP \f[I]datafile\fP \f[I]textfile\fP
.sp 0.3
.B \*(n)
.B \-V
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to encode and decode the
\f[CW]SYSTEM.MISCINFO\fP configuration file.
.PP
This configuration file is read by \f[CW]SYSTEM.PASCAL\fP when
the system boots, and is used to control how the system output
terminal is used for many operations.  It is also used by editors
(\f[CW]SYSTEM.EDITOR\fP or \f[CW]YALOE\fP) to understand how to
manipulate the screen.
.PP
Think of it as a very poor \f[I]terminfo\fP(3) substitute.  The
\f[I]ucsdpsys_vm\fP(1) virtual machine takes care of translating the
terminal control characters, and uses \f[I]curses\fP(3) to be terminal
independent.
.PP
The result of the \f[I]ucsdpsys_setup \-d\fP command is in the same
format as the \f[I]ucsdpsys_setup \-e\fP expects as input.  This means
you can, for example, track its contents with a version control system.
.SS Field Values
A effort has been made to be as similar as possible to the original
\f[CW]SETUP\fP program, except that it isn't interactive.  The fields
all have the same names as the original \f[CW]SETUP\fP program, and
accept similar values.
.TP 8n
boolean
The values \f[CW]true\fP and \f[CW]false\fP, and several synonyms for
each, are understood.
.TP 8n
char
The values are given as decimal integers, or control characters may be
given using their tradition three\[hy]character ASCI names.
.TP 8n
integer
Integer values fields may be given as decimal text.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  A  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_architecture.so
This is used to encode and decode the 16\[hy]bit fields in the data.
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TP 8n
\fB\-\-decode\fP
This option is used to decode the binary form into the text form.
.\" ----------  E  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-e\fP
.TP 8n
\fB\-\-encode\fP
This option is used to encode the text form into the binary form.
.\" ----------  H  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_host.so
.\" ----------  P  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_pmachine.so
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TP 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the
.I \*(n)
program being executed.
.\" ----------  Z  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
