'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_foto
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd-psystem-xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_foto \- convert .foto images to and from .png
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_foto(1)" "convert .foto images to and from .png"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP... ] \fB\-\-decode\fP
\f[I]filename\fP.foto \f[I]filename\fP.png
.sp 0.3
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP... ] \fB\-\-encode\fP
\f[I]filename\fP.png \f[I]filename\fP.foto
.sp 0.3
.B \*(n)
.B -VERSion
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to convert \f[CW].foto\fP images to and
from \f[CW].png\fP images.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ
\fB\-\-decode\fP
This option is used to specify that the conversion is
from \f[CW].foto\fP to \f[CW].png\fP files.
.TP 8n
\fB\-e\fP
.TQ
\fB\-\-encode\fP
This option is used to specify that the conversion is
from \f[CW].png\fP to \f[CW].foto\fP files.
.TP 8n
\fB\-i\fP
.TQ
\fB\-\-invert\fP
This option may be used to
invert the pixel values before writing.
.TP 8n
\fB\-s\fP \f[I]width\fP\f[B]x\fP\f[I]height\fP
.TQ
\fB\-\-size=\fP\f[I]width\fP\f[B]x\fP\f[I]height\fP
When reading from a \f[CW].foto\fP file,
this option may be used to specify the size of the image.
If not specified, the image size will be estimated from the file size.
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
