'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2011, 2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_pretty
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd-psystem-xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_pretty \- UCSD p\[hy]System Pascal pretty printer
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_pretty(1)" "UCSD p\[hy]System Pascal pretty printer"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP... ] \f[I]filename\fP
.br
\fB\*(n)\fP \fB\-\-version\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to re\[hy]format the source file of a Pascal
program.  The re\[hy]formatted program is written to the standard output.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" --------  A  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  B  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  C  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  D  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-debug\fP
This option may be used to increase the verbosity of debug output.
May be specified more than once.
.\" --------  E  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  F  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-f\fP\f[I]name\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-feature\fP \f[I]name\fP
This option may be used to turn enable or disable the various features.
See \f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1) for more information.
.\" --------  G  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  H  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  I  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-I\fP\f[I]directory\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-include\fP \f[I]directory\fP
This option may be used to nominate a directory to be search for include files.
This option may be used more than once.
.\" --------  J  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  K  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  L  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  M  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  N  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  O  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP\f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-output\fP \f[I]filename\fP
This option may be used to redirect the output to the named file.
If not specified, output will be written to the standard output.
.\" --------  P  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  Q  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  R  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  S  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  T  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  U  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  V  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the
.I \*(n)
program being executed.
.\" --------  W  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-W\fP\f[I]name\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-warning\fP \f[I]name\fP
This option may be used to enable or disable the various warnings.
See \f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1) for more information.
.\" --------  X  -----------------------------------------------------------
.\" --------  Y  -----------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-y\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-grammar\-trace\fP
Turn on parse debugging.  Very verbose.
Intended for compiler developers only.
.\" --------  Z  -----------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
