'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System operating system
.\"     Copyright (C) 2006, 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_depends
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_depends \- UCSD Pascal file dependency tracker
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_depends(1)" "UCSD Pascal file dependency tracker"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP... ] \f[I]filename\fP...
.br
\fB\*(n) \-V\fP
The \f[I]\*(n)\fP program is used to
scan a Pascal source file for include directives.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.TP 8n
\fB\-I\fP \f[I]directory\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-include=\fP\f[I]directory\fP
This option is used to specify an include file directory to search.
This option may be given more than once.
.TP 8n
\fB\-J\fP \f[I]directory\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-view\[hy]path=\fP\f[I]directory\fP
This option is used to specify a directory to append to the view path.
This option may be given more than once.
.TP 8n
\fB\-L\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-one\[hy]per\[hy]line\fP
The dependencies are usually written all on the one line.
This option requests that each be on a separate line.
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-output=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
This option may be used to specify the output file.
Defaults to the standard output.
.TP 8n
\fB\-P\fP \f[I]string\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-prefix=\fP\f[I]string\fP
The prefix to put at the start of the output line.
.TP 8n
\fB\-r\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-recursive\fP
This option may be used to request recursive analysis.
Because \f[I]cook\fP(1) cascade directives are being used, recursive
analysis is rarely needed.
.TP 8n
\fB\-S\fP \f[I]string\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-suffix=\fP\f[I]string\fP
The suffix to put at the end of the output line.
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \f[I]\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System Pascal compiler
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
