'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2006, 2007, 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_libmap
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_libmap \- print map of UCSD p\[hy]System code file
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_libmap(1)" "print map of UCSD p\[hy]System code file"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \fIoption\fP... ] \fIcode\[hy]file\[hy]name\fP...
.br
\fB\*(n) \-V\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to print out a map of a UCSD p\[hy]System
code file.  This is equivalent to the \f[CW]LIBMAP\fP program which
comes with the UCSD p\[hy]System, but you can run it from Unix.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  D  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-d\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-debug\fP
Increase the debug output level.
.\" ----------  O  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP
\fB\-o\fP \fIfilename\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-output=\fP\fIfilename\fP
Write the output to the named file, rather than the standard output.
.\" ----------  P  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_pmachine.so
.\" ----------  V  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.\" ----------  W  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_disassemble\fP(1)
disassemble a UCSD p\[hy]System code file
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_link\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System codefile linker
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
