'\" t
.\" UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\" Copyright (C) 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.char \[lsq] \[u2018]
.char \[rsq] \[u2019]
.ad b
.ds n) ucsdpsys_osmakgen
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_osmakgen \- write the Makefile for the ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]os project
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_osmakgen(1)" "write Makefile for ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]os project"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \f[I]option\fP\&... ][ \f[I]filename\fP\&... ]
.sp 0.3
\fB\*(n) \-\-arch\[hy]from\[hy]host \f[I]name\fP
.sp 0.3
\fB\*(n) \-\-version\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to write the \f[CW]Makefile.in\fP file for the
ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]os project, based on the file names provided.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
The generated \f[CW]Makefile.in\fP file uses the \f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1)
cross compiler to bootstrap a UCSD p\[hy]System from sources alone.
This becomes \f[CW]SYSTEM.COMPILER\fP on the system disk images,
and some support files.
.TP
\[bu]
The source files will be scanned, using the \f[I]ucsdpsys_depends\fP(1)
tool, for include dependencies, and the results incorportaed into the
generated \f[CW]Makefile.in\fP file.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
The \f[I]ucsdpsys_assemble\fP(1) multi\[hy]target cross assembler
is used to assemble any necessary assembler code.
This becomes \f[CW]SYSTEM.ASSMBLER\fP [sic] on the system disk images,
and some support files.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
The \f[I]ucsdpsys_setup\fP(1) tool is used to translate a text
representation of \f[CW]SYSTEM.MISCINFO\fP, if present, into the binary form.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
The \f[I]ucsdpsys_charset\fP(1) tool is used to translate a text
representation of \f[CW]SYSTEM.CHARSET\fP, if present, into the binary form.
.TP 2n
\[bu]
The executables, and other system files, are then combined into disk
images, using the \f[I]ucsdpsys_mkfs\fP(1) and \f[I]ucsdpsys_disk\fP(1)
file system tools.
.SS Directory Structure
The \fI\*(n)\fP command takes its cues from the names of the files you
give to it.
.TP 8n
\f[I]program\fP\f[CW]/main.text
.RS
The existence of a file with this name pattern indicates that the
\f[I]program\fP is to be compiled using a Pascal compiler.
That file can always include other files, but only from the same directory.
The codefile resulting from the compilation will be placed into
\f[CW]stage\fP\f[I]n\fP\f[CW]/\fP\f[I]host\fP\f[CW]/codefiles/\
\fP\f[I]program\fP\f[CW]/main.code\fP
.PP
If there is an assembler component, the output of the compilation is
\f[CW]main.pas.code\fP, and then the \f[I]ucsdpsys_link\fP(1) command is
used to link \f[CW]main.pas.code\fP and \f[CW]main.asm.code\fP to form
the final \f[CW]main.code\fP file.
.RE
.TP
\f[CW]arch/\fP
This directory contains subdirectories, each one named for a specfic
microprocessor.
Each of these subdirectories contain various programs and library
components specific to that microprocessor.
Examples include \[lq]pdp11\[rq], \[lq]z80\[rq], and \[lq]6502\[rq].
.TP
\f[CW]arch/$(arch)/\fP
Within the generated \f[CW]Makefile\fP file, the relevant subdirectoiry
is always accessed using this construct.
.TP 8n
\f[CW]arch/$(arch)/\fP\f[I]program\fP\f[CW]/main.asm.text
.RS
The existence of a file with this name pattern indicates that the
\f[I]program\fP is to be built using a cross assembler.
That file can always include other files, but only from the same directory.
The codefile resulting from the assembly will be placed into
\f[CW]stage\fP\f[I]n\fP\f[CW]/\fP\f[I]host\fP\f[CW]/codefiles/\
\fP\f[I]program\fP\f[CW]/main.asm.code\fP
.PP
The \f[I]ucsdpsys_link\fP(1) command is used to link \f[CW]main.pas.code\fP
and \f[CW]main.asm.code\fP to form the final \f[CW]main.code\fP file.
.PP
\f[B]Note:\fP the assembler component is in a directory named the same
as the Pascal portion of the program.  However, it is an \f[I]arch\fP
sub\[hy]directory, so that it is possible to have all of the sourec code,
including all architecture variants, in the same source tree.
.RE
.TP
\f[CW]arch/$(arch)/assembler/main.text\fP
Each microprocessor has its own assembler, and this is where it may be found.
Note we have not yet recovered the source code to all of the assemblers,
so coverage will be inconsistent.
.TP
\f[CW]arch/$(arch)/assembler/error\[hy]messages.text\fP
This file, if present, will be used to create the \f[CW]$(arch).ERRORS\fP
data file, by processing it with the \f[I]ucsdpsys_errors\fP(1) command.
.TP
\f[CW]arch/$(arch)/assembler/opcode\[hy]data.text\fP
This file, if present, will be used to create the \f[CW]$(arch).OPCODES\fP
data file, by processing it with the \f[I]ucsdpsys_opcodes\fP(1) command.
.TP
\f[CW]host/\fP
This directory contains subdirectories, each one named for a specfic
host system (brand name) that are implemented using a micro processor,
but include varying sets of peripherals.
Each of these subdirectories contain various programs and library
components specific to that host hardware.
Examples include \[lq]terak\[rq], \[lq]cpm\[rq], and \[lq]apple\[rq].
.TP
\f[CW]host/$(host)/\fP
Within the generated \f[CW]Makefile\fP file, the relevant subdirectoiry
is always accessed using this construct.
.TP
\f[CW]host/$(host)/miscinfo.text\fP
This is the location of the host\[hy]specific text source file of the
\f[CW]SYSTEM.MISCINFO\fP data file.
.TP
\f[CW]stage\fP\f[I]n\fP\f[CW]/system.syntax\fP
This file is constructed from the
\f[CW]compiler/error\[hy]messages.text\fP file,
if present.
.TP
\f[CW]host/$(host)/charset/system.text\fP
.RS
This is the character set to use to build the \f[CW]SYSTEM.CHARSET\fP
file.  It is translated into the \f[CW]charset/system.charset\fP
file using the \f[I]ucsdpsys_charset\fP(1) command.  Any other
\f[CW].text\fP files in this directory will also be translated into
binary \[lsq]\f[CW].charset\fP\[rsq] files.
.PP
The Terak manual (section 4.4) has this to say about file names:
\[lq]The monochromatic character set file carries the extension
\[lsq]\f[CW]\&.charset\fP\[rsq].  The utilities for working with a
monochromatic character set will use this extension as the default.\[rq]
(Note that UCSD Pascal file names are not case\[hy]sensitive, but Unix
file names are.)
.RE
.TP
\f[CW]charset/system.text\fP
This is the default character set to use to build the
\f[CW]SYSTEM.CHARSET\fP file, if a host\[hy]specific charset is not
available.  It is translated into \f[CW]charset/system.charset\fP
using the \f[I]ucsdpsys_charset\fP(1) command.  Any other
\[lsq]\f[CW].text\fP\[rsq] files in this directory will also be
translated into binary \[lsq]\f[CW].charset\fP\[rsq] files.
.TP
\f[CW]host/$(host)/charset/system.png\fP
.RS
If present, this image is loaded as a 64\[mu]64 icon at the end of
the \f[CW]SYSTEM.CHARSET\fP file.
Otherwise, if \f[CW]triton.png\fP (the UCSD mascot) is present, use that.
Otherwise, use any \[lsq]\f[CW]charset/*.png\fP\[rsq] file that is available.
.PP
From the Terak Manual (section 4.4):
\[lq]Bytes 2049\[hy]3072: If the character set file is 5 blocks in length,
these bytes contain the graphics logo displayed on the monochrome
monitor at boot time.\[rq]
.PP
Why they didn't just give the boot logo it its own file is a mystery.
Maybe it saved a few bytes of p\[hy]code,
it certainly didn't save any disk space.
.PP
The file must be \f[I]at least\fP 5 blocks, not \f[I]exactly\fP 5 blocks.
The Terak manual fails to mention that the image is 64\[mu]64 pixels, 8 bytes
per row, least significant bit of each byte is on the left, top row first.
The pixel values are inverted, compared to modern conventions.
.RE
.TP
\f[CW]charset/system.png\fP
If present, this image is loaded as a 64\[mu]64 icon into the end of
the \f[CW]SYSTEM.CHARSET\fP file.  It is the fall back when looking
for boot images, and a host\[hy]specific image is not available.
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.\" ----------  A  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_architecture.so
This option may be used to specify an alternative architecture name in
the generated Makefile.  By default, it is calculated from the name of
the host.  You should need this option very rarely.
.TP 8n
\fB\-a\fP \f[I]name\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-arch\[hy]from\[hy]host=\fP\f[I]name\fP
This option may be used to translate
a host name (\f[I]e.g.\fP \[lq]terak\[rq]) into
an architecture name (\f[I]e.g.\fP \[lq]pdp11\[rq]).
.\" ----------  B  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-b\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-no\[hy]blurb\fP
This option may be used to suppress the extensive comments generated
into the Makefile.
.\" ----------  C  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-c\fP \f[I]number\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-change=\fP\f[I]number\fP
This option is used to specify the number of the Aegis change set to ask
for the list of file names.
.TP 8n
\fB\-C\fP \f[I]text\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-copyright=\fP\f[I]text\fP
This option may be used to specify the copyright notice to be attached
to the system library.  Use the empty string to have no copyright notice.
.\" ----------  H  ---------------------------------------------------------
.so man/man1/o_host.so
This option may be used to specify an alternative host system name.
Defaults to \[lq]klebsch\[rq], in reference to the \f[I]ucsdpsys_vm\fP(1)
interpreter written by Mario Klebsch.
.\" ----------  O  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-output=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
This option may be used to specify the name of the file to be written.
Defaults to \[lq]Makefile\[rq] if not given.
The name \[lq]\-\[rq] is understood to mean the standard output.
.\" ----------  P  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-p\fP \f[I]name\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-project=\fP\f[I]name\fP
This option is used to specify the name of the Aegis project to ask for
the list of file names.  If you specify neither an Aegis change set nor
an Aegis project name, only filename named omn the command line are
considered.
.\" ----------  VV  ---------------------------------------------------------
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.\" ----------  Z  ---------------------------------------------------------
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_assemble\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System multi\[hy]target Cross Assembler
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System Cross Compiler
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_depends\fP(1)
Include file dependency finder.
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_disk\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System disk image manipulation.
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_mkfs\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System disk image creator.
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_setup\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System SYSTEM.MISCINFO encoder and decoder
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_vm\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System virtual machine (p\[hy]code interpreter).
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so


/* vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et : */
