'\" t
.\"     UCSD p-System cross compiler
.\"     Copyright (C) 2006, 2007, 2010-2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) ucsdpsys_disassemble
.TH \*(n) 1 ucsd\[hy]psystem\[hy]xc "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
ucsdpsys_disassemble \- disassemble a UCSD p\[hy]System code file
.if require_index \{
.XX "ucsdpsys_disassemble(1)" "disassemble a UCSD p\[hy]System code file"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\*(n)\fP [ \fIoption\fP...  ] \fIfilename\fP
.br
\fB\*(n) \-V\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I \*(n)
program is used to
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.TP 8n
\fB\-a\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-no\-address\fP
Do not include addresses in the output.
This makes automated testing easier when just a byte or two is added,
it stops the diff being unhelpfully large.
.TP 8n
\fB\-c\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-comment\fP
Add a descriptive comment for each opcode.
.TP 8n
\fB\-e\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-extend\fP
This option is used to include the structure of the codefile itself in
the listing.
.TP 8n
\fB\-o\fP \f[I]filename\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-output=\fP\f[I]filename\fP
Write the output to the named file, rather than the standard output.
.so man/man1/o_pmachine.so
.TP 8n
\fB\-V\fP
.TQ 8n
\fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of the \fI\*(n)\fP program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_assemble\fP(1)
UCSD p\[hy]System cross assembler, for multiple CPU types
.TP 8n
\f[I]ucsdpsys_compile\fP(1)
A cross compiler from Pascal to UCSD p\[hy]System codefiles.
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
